15 July, 2021

# Additive and interactive effects of human footprint across spatial scales

## Executive Summary

Human activity, such as forest harvest, oil and gas drilling, and other
industrial development is rapidly altering the North American boreal
landscape (Brandt et al. 2013, Venier et al. 2014), leading to changes
in composition and distribution of wildlife species that can be
difficult to understand and predict (Venier et al. 2020). There is
growing evidence of the interactive effects of multiple anthropogenic
stressors on wildlife populations (Mahon et al. 2019), and understanding
these effects is critical to sustainable land management and long-term
conservation planning (Venier et al. 2020). Many boreal bird species
demonstrate negative responses to industrial disturbances, which leads
to alterations in biodiversity and ecological functioning. Effective
regulation of industrial development requires understanding how
anthropogenic disturbance effects bird populations and biodiversity.
Disturbances can differ greatly in intensity and spatial extent. For
example, seismic lines cover an extensive area in parts of the western
boreal forest, while having relatively low intensity of impact, while
industrial sites, while industrial sites have high impact but are
spatially limited (Mahon et al. 2019). Complicating the issue further,
the influence of spatial scale (the grain and extent of measurement) on
observed patterns in ecology has been well known, and little understood,
for a long time (Wiens 1989, Mayor et al. 2009, McGarigal et al. 2016).
Two primary aspects of this issue are that species’ responses to
environmental characteristics can change drastically at different
spatial scales (domains of scale, Wiens 1989), and that spatial scale is
strongly linked to hierarchically structured levels of organization and
ecological processes (Bissonette 1997). Research has shown additive and
interactive effects of anthropogenic disturbance on bird species at
single scales (Mahon et al. 2019). However, it is unclear how these
effects might change across spatial scales. The goal of this research is
to quantify the effects of multiple disturbance types on boreal bird
populations at different spatial scales in the western boreal region of
Canada. Our objectives were to: 1) describe the distributions of
anthropogenic disturbance types across multiple spatial extents; 2)
quantify additive and interactive effects of disturbance across scales;
and 3) quantify how effects of individual disturbance types changes
across scales as a function of extent and intensity of the disturbance.
We hypothesize the scale-dependent effects will differ greatly among
disturbance types and species, and that spatial extent versus intensity
of disturbance will influence the scale at which individual disturbance
types effect populations most strongly. This research will provide
clarity on how anthropogenic disturbance affects bird populations at
different spatial scales, and provide managers with guidance for
regulations to conserve avian biodiversity in the western boreal forest
of Canada.

## Literature Cited

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
line-spacing="2">

<div id="ref-Bissonette1997" class="csl-entry">

Bissonette, J. A. 1997. <span class="nocase">Wildlife and landscape
ecology: effects of pattern and scale</span>. Springer New York, New
York, New York, USA.

</div>

<div id="ref-Brandt2013" class="csl-entry">

Brandt, J. P., M. D. Flannigan, D. G. Maynard, I. D. Thompson, and W. J.
a. Volney. 2013. <span class="nocase">An introduction to Canada’s boreal
zone: ecosystem processes, health, sustainability, and environmental
issues</span>. Environmental Reviews 21:207–226.

</div>

<div id="ref-Mahon2019" class="csl-entry">

Mahon, C. L., G. L. Holloway, E. M. Bayne, and J. D. Toms. 2019. <span
class="nocase">Additive and interactive cumulative effects on boreal
landbirds: winners and losers in a multi‐stressor landscape</span>.
Ecological Applications 29:1–18.

</div>

<div id="ref-Mayor2009" class="csl-entry">

Mayor, S. J., D. C. Schneider, J. A. Schaefer, and S. P. Mahoney. 2009.
<span class="nocase">Habitat selection at multiple scales</span>.
Écoscience 16:238–247.

</div>

<div id="ref-McGarigal2016" class="csl-entry">

McGarigal, K., H. Y. Wan, K. A. Zeller, B. C. Timm, and S. A. Cushman.
2016. <span class="nocase">Multi-scale habitat selection modeling: a
review and outlook</span>. Landscape Ecology 31:1161–1175.

</div>

<div id="ref-Venier2014" class="csl-entry">

Venier, L. A., I. D. Thompson, R. Fleming, J. Malcolm, I. Aubin, J. A.
Trofymow, D. Langor, R. Sturrock, C. Patry, R. O. Outerbridge, S. B.
Holmes, S. Haeussler, L. De Grandpré, H. Y. H. Chen, E. Bayne, A.
Arsenault, and J. P. Brandt. 2014. <span class="nocase">Effects of
natural resource development on the terrestrial biodiversity of Canadian
boreal forests</span>. Environmental Reviews 22:457–490.

</div>

<div id="ref-Venier2020" class="csl-entry">

Venier, L. A., R. Walton, and J. P. Brandt. 2020. <span
class="nocase">Scientific considerations and challenges for addressing
cumulative effects in forest landscapes in Canada.</span> Environmental
Reviews:er-2019-0072.

</div>

<div id="ref-Wiens1989" class="csl-entry">

Wiens, J. A. 1989. <span class="nocase">Spatial Scaling in
Ecology</span>. Functional Ecology 3:385.

</div>

</div>
